# 5 Core identifiers

## 5.1 General

A core identifier is composed of four fields, each separated by a colon (`:`), as follows:

The first field is the *type of the identifier*
and it is defined to be `swh`.

The second field is the *version of the identifier scheme*
and for this version of the specification
it is defined to be `1`.

The third field is a tag corresponding to the *type of object*
Identified, as follows:

- `cnt` for **contents** (see 5.2)
- `dir` for **directories** (see 5.3)
- `rev` for **revisions** (see 5.4)
- `rel` for **releases** (see 5.5)
- `snp` for **snapshots** (see 5.6)

The fourth field is the *intrinsic identifier* of the object.
This is a hex-encoded (using lowercase ASCII characters) hash value
computed from the content and relevant metadata of the object.

## 5.2 Contents

A *content* is a byte sequence, typically, the content of a file.
For this type of object, the intrinsic identifier is the hash of it;
that is, the SHA1 of the byte sequence obtained by concatenating:

- the ASCII string `"blob"` (4 bytes),
- an ASCII space,
- the length of the content as ASCII-encoded decimal digits,
- a NULL byte,
- and the actual content of the file.

No metadata is used for this type of object (in particular, notice that there
is no file *name* mentioned here).

As an example, `swh:1:cnt:94a9ed024d3859793618152ea559a168bbcbb5e2` is the SWHID computed from [the full text of the GPL3 license](https://archive.softwareheritage.org/swh:1:cnt:94a9ed024d3859793618152ea559a168bbcbb5e2).

## 5.3 Directories

Directories are data structures commonly used in hierarchical file systems to group together files and other directories, and to hold relevant metadata about them, in the form of directory entries.

This specification adopts the same convention as the Git version control system, and only takes into account as metadata the name of the directory entries (as a sequence of arbitrary bytes, excluding ASCII '/' and the NULL byte) and a simplified representation of the access rights.

The names of entries in a directory shall be distinct from one another.

In order to compute the intrinsic identifier of a directory, it is necessary to compute first the SWHID of each object listed in that directory.

Then a serialization of the directory is created, as follows:

1. sort the directory entries using the following algorithm:
   1. for each entry pointing to a *directory*, append an ASCII '/' to its name
   2. sort all entries using the byte order of their (modified) name

2. for each entry, with a given *name* (unmodified), add a sequence of bytes composed of
   1. the normalized access rights, encoded as a sequence of ASCII-encoded octal digits ('100644' for regular [i.e., non-special] files, '100755' for executable files, '120000' for symbolic links, and '40000' for directories),
   2. an ASCII space,
   3. the *name* as a string of bytes,
   4. a NULL byte,
   5. the *intrinsic identifier* of the *content* or *directory*, encoded as a sequence of 20 bytes.

The intrinsic identifier of the directory is the SHA1 of the byte sequence obtained by concatenating

- the ASCII string `"tree"` (4 bytes),
- an ASCII space,
- the length of the previously obtained serialization as ASCII-encoded decimal digits,
- a NULL byte,
- and the previously obtained serialization.

As an example, `swh:1:dir:d198bc9d7a6bcf6db04f476d29314f157507d505`
is the SWHID computed from
[a directory containing the source code of the darktable photography application](https://archive.softwareheritage.org/swh:1:dir:d198bc9d7a6bcf6db04f476d29314f157507d505) at
a given point in time of its development on May 4th 2017.

## 5.4 Revisions

Software development within a specific project is essentially a time-indexed series of copies of a single “root” directory that contains the entire project source code. Software evolves when a developer modifies the content of one or more files in that directory and records their changes.

Each recorded copy of the root directory is known as a “revision”. It points to a single fully determined directory and is equipped with arbitrary metadata. Some of those are added manually by the developer (for example, a revision message), others are automatically synthesized (timestamps, parent revision(s), and so forth).

The supported metadata is, as follows:

- author (arbitrary byte sequence, mandatory): generally contains the name and email address of the author of the revision.
- author timestamp (decimal timestamp from the Unix epoch, mandatory): the date at which the revision was authored.
- author timezone offset (arbitrary byte sequence, optional): UTC offset at which the revision was authored, usually an ASCII-encoded [+/-]HHMM specification.
- committer (arbitrary byte sequence, mandatory): generally contains the name and email address of the committer of the revision.
- committer timestamp (decimal timestamp from the Unix epoch, mandatory): the date at which the revision was committed.
- committer timezone offset (arbitrary byte sequence, optional): UTC offset at which the revision was committed, usually an ASCII-encoded [+/-]HHMM specification.
- directory (mandatory): the root directory recorded by the revision
- parent revisions (ordered list of revisions, optional): the immediately preceding revisions in the development timeline. Can be empty for an initial revision, and have multiple revisions when multiple branches of history are being merged.
- extra headers (ordered list of byte key/value pairs, optional): arbitrary additional metadata attached to the revision. The key must not contain the ASCII bytes for the space or LF characters; commonly used keys are a string of non-whitespace printable ASCII characters, such as `"encoding"` (where the value is interpreted as the encoding of the message field) or `"gpgsig"` (where the value is interpreted as a cryptographic signature of the metadata of the revision).
- message: the message describing the revision (optional)

In order to compute the intrinsic identifier of a revision, it is necessary to first compute the intrinsic identifier of the root directory recorded by the revision, as well as the intrinsic identifier of all parent revisions (recursively).

The serialization of the revision is a sequence of lines in the following order:

- the reference to the root directory:
  - the ASCII string `"tree"` (4 bytes),
  - an ASCII space,
  - the ASCII-encoded hexadecimal intrinsic identifier of the directory (40 ASCII bytes),
  - an LF;
- for each parent revision, in the order they've been provided, a reference to that revision:
  - the ASCII string `"parent"` (6 bytes),
  - an ASCII space,
  - the ASCII-encoded hexadecimal intrinsic identifier of the parent revision (40 ASCII bytes),
  - an LF;
- the author line:
  - the ASCII string `"author"` (6 bytes),
  - an ASCII space,
  - the string of bytes provided for the author name and email, with each LF replaced by LF followed by an ASCII space,
  - an ASCII space,
  - the ASCII-encoded decimal representation of the author timestamp,
  - an ASCII space,
  - the string of bytes provided for the author timezone offset, with each LF replaced by LF followed by an ASCII space,
  - an LF;
- the committer line:
  - the ASCII string `"committer"` (9 bytes),
  - an ASCII space,
  - the string of bytes provided for the committer name and email, with each LF replaced by LF followed by an ASCII space,
  - an ASCII space,
  - the ASCII-encoded decimal representation of the committer timestamp,
  - an ASCII space,
  - the string of bytes provided for the committer timezone offset, with each LF replaced by LF followed by an ASCII space,
  - an LF;
- the extra header lines; for each provided key/value pair, in the order they have been provided:
  - the key,
  - an ASCII space,
  - the value, with each LF replaced by LF followed by an ASCII space,
  - an LF;
- if the message is defined:
  - an extra LF (the message is separated from the header with two LFs),
  - the commit message as a raw string of bytes.

The intrinsic identifier of the revision is the SHA1 of the byte sequence obtained by concatenating

 - the ASCII string `"commit"` (6 bytes),
 - an ASCII space,
 - the length of the previously obtained serialization as ASCII-encoded decimal digits,
 - a NULL byte,
 - and the previously obtained serialization.

As an example, `swh:1:rev:309cf2674ee7a0749978cf8265ab91a60aea0f7d` is the SWHID computed from
[a commit in the development history of Darktable](https://archive.softwareheritage.org/swh:1:rev:309cf2674ee7a0749978cf8265ab91a60aea0f7d), dated 16 January 2017, that added undo/redo supports for masks.

## 5.5 Releases

Some revisions get selected by developers as denoting important project milestones known as “releases”. Each release points to the last commit in project history corresponding to that release and carries metadata: release name and version, release message, cryptographic signatures, and so forth. If they're not attached to development history (for instance, if they've been imported from bare archive files), releases can also point directly to a root directory instead of a full revision with metadata.

The metadata fields supported by this specification are as follows:

- name (arbitrary byte sequence, mandatory): a name identifying the release
- author (arbitrary byte sequence, optional): generally contains the name and email address of the author of the release.
- author timestamp (decimal timestamp from the Unix epoch, optional): the date at which the release was authored.
- author timezone offset (arbitrary byte sequence, optional): UTC offset at which the release was authored, usually an ASCII-encoded [+/-]HHMM specification.
- target object (mandatory): a reference to another object, which can be either a revision, a directory or less commonly a content or another release
- message: the message describing the release (optional)

In order to compute the intrinsic identifier of a release, it is necessary to first compute the intrinsic identifier of the targeted object.

The serialization of the release is a sequence of lines in the following order:

- the reference to the target object:
  - the ASCII string `"object"` (6 bytes)
  - an ASCII space
  - the ASCII-encoded hexadecimal intrinsic identifier of the target object (40 ASCII bytes)
  - an LF
  - the ASCII string `"type"` (4 bytes)
  - an ASCII space
  - an ASCII string referencing the type of the target object (`"commit"` for a revision, `"tree"` for a directory, `"tag"` for another release, `"blob"` for a content object)
  - an LF
- the name of the release:
  - the ASCII string `"tag"` (3 bytes)
  - an ASCII space
  - the string of bytes provided for the release name, with each LF replaced by LF followed by an ASCII space
  - an LF
- if there is an author, the author line:
  - the ASCII string `"tagger"` (6 bytes)
  - an ASCII space
  - the string of bytes provided for the author name and email, with each LF replaced by LF followed by an ASCII space
  - an ASCII space
  - the ASCII-encoded decimal representation of the author timestamp
  - an ASCII space
  - the string of bytes provided for the author timezone offset, with each LF replaced by LF followed by an ASCII space
  - an LF
- if the message is defined:
  - an extra LF (the message is separated from the header with two LFs)
  - the commit message as a raw string of bytes

The intrinsic identifier of the release is the SHA1 of the byte sequence obtained by concatenating

- the ASCII string `"tag"` (3 bytes),
- an ASCII space,
- the length of the previously obtained serialization as ASCII-encoded decimal digits,
- a NULL byte,
- and the previously obtained serialization.

As an example, `swh:1:rel:22ece559cc7cc2364edc5e5593d63ae8bd229f9f` is the SWHID computed from
the [Darktable release 2.3.0](https://archive.softwareheritage.org/swh:1:rel:22ece559cc7cc2364edc5e5593d63ae8bd229f9f), dated 24 December 2016.

## 5.6 Snapshots

Any kind of software origin offers multiple pointers to the “current” state of a development project. In the case of a version control system this is reflected by branches (for instance, master, development, but also so called feature branches dedicated to extending the software in a specific direction); in the case of package distributions by notions such as suites that correspond to different maturity levels of individual packages (for example, stable, development, and so forth).

A “snapshot” of a given software origin records all entry points found there and where each of them was pointing at the time. For example, a snapshot object might track the commit where the master branch was pointing to at any given time, as well as the most recent release of a given package in the stable suite of a free and open source software (FOSS) distribution.

Practically, a snapshot is a list of named branches pointing at objects of any of the known types (content, directory, revision, release or snapshot). A branch can also be an alias to another (named) branch, for instance the default `"HEAD"` branch can point at another, more specific, `"refs/heads/main"` branch.

To compute the intrinsic identifier of a snapshot, first compute the intrinsic identifier of all objects referenced by the snapshot.

Then create a serialization of the snapshot, as follows:

1. sort the snapshot branches using the natural byte order of their name

2. for each branch, with a given *name*, add a sequence of bytes composed of
  - the type of the branch target:
    - `"content"`, `"directory"`, `"revision"`, `"release"` or `"snapshot"` for each corresponding object type
    - `"alias"` for branches referencing another branch;
  - an ASCII space
  - the branch name (as raw bytes)
  - a NULL byte
  - the length of the target identifier, as an ascii-encoded decimal number (`"20"` for intrinsic identifiers, the length of the name of the target branch for branch aliases)
  - an ASCII colon (`":"`)
  - the identifier of the target object pointed at by the branch:
    - for contents, directories, revisions, releases or snapshots: their intrinsic identifier as a string of 20 bytes
    - for branch aliases, the name of the target branch (as a string of bytes)
    - for dangling branches, the empty string

   Note that, akin to the serialization of directories, there is no separator between entries. Because of alias branches, target identifiers are of arbitrary length and are length-encoded to avoid ambiguity.

The intrinsic identifier of the snapshot is the SHA1 of the byte sequence obtained by concatenating

- the ASCII string `"snapshot"` (8 bytes),
- an ASCII space,
- the length of the previously obtained serialization as ASCII-encoded decimal digits,
- a NULL byte,
- and the previously obtained serialization.

As an example, `swh:1:snp:c7c108084bc0bf3d81436bf980b46e98bd338453` is the SWHID computed from
[a snapshot of the entire Darktable Git repository](https://archive.softwareheritage.org/swh:1:snp:c7c108084bc0bf3d81436bf980b46e98bd338453) as it was on 4 May 2017 on GitHub.

## 5.8 Compatibility with Git

NOTE: For this specification, SWHIDs for contents, directories, revisions, and releases are 
compatible with the way the current version of [Git](https://git-scm.com/)
proceeds for
[computing identifiers](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Git-Internals-Git-Objects) for
its objects. However, Git compatibility is practical, but incidental and is not guaranteed to be
maintained in future versions of this specification, nor across different versions of
Git.
