# 6 Qualified identifiers

### Qualifiers

A qualified, or full, SWHID is composed of a core SWHID identifier, and a
sequence of qualifiers.

Qualifiers may be:

- *fragment qualifiers* (see 6.1), that identify subparts of a software artifact; or
- *context qualifiers* (see 6.2), that provide additional context on the software artifact.

Each qualifier is specified as a key-value pair, using an `=` character as a separator.
Qualifiers are separated from the core identifier and from each other by using a `;` character.

Some qualifiers are valid for specific object types,
and the validity of some qualifiers depends on the presence of other qualifiers.
Conformant implementation MUST not generate invalid qualifiers
or qualifier combinations and MUST ignore them if present,
as detailed in the following sections.

## 6.1 Fragment qualifiers

There are two fragment qualifiers, `lines` and `bytes`.
Each fragment qualifier MUST appear at most once.

Fragment qualifiers are only valid for objects of type content.

Each valid SWHID must have at most one fragment qualifier.

A conformant implementation MAY accept a SWHID that violates this constraint,
by ignoring the `lines` qualifier when the `bytes` qualifier is present.

### 6.1.1 Lines qualifier

A "line" in the context of a file content refers to a sequence of characters that ends with a line break. This line can contain text, code, or any other form of data. In this specification, the line break is the ASCII LF character.
The "lines" qualifier allows to designate a line range inside a content.
The range can be a single line number, or a pair of line numbers separated by the ASCII `-` character.
Line numbers start from 1, and the range is inclusive, i.e. the fragment includes both the lines numbered as the start and end of the range.

For example, [`swh:1:cnt:4d99d2d18326621ccdd70f5ea66c2e2ac236ad8b;lines=9-15`](https://archive.softwareheritage.org/swh:1:cnt:4d99d2d18326621ccdd70f5ea66c2e2ac236ad8b;lines=9-15)
designates the function `generate_input_stream` that is found at lines 9 to 15 of the *content* with core SWHID `swh:1:cnt:4d99d2d18326621ccdd70f5ea66c2e2ac236ad8b`.

Notice that the notion of "line number" is not always meaningful: the content
may be a binary file, or a file that uses non standard line termination character(s).

### 6.1.2 Bytes qualifier

To overcome the limitations of the lines qualifier, the bytes qualifier allows
designation of a byte range inside a content.  The range can be a single byte number, or a pair of byte numbers separated by `-`.
Byte numbers start from 0, and the range is inclusive, i.e. the fragment includes both the bytes numbered as the start and end of the range.
If the range is a single byte number, it designates the byte at that specific position.

For example, `swh:1:cnt:4d99d2d18326621ccdd70f5ea66c2e2ac236ad8b;bytes=154-315`
designates the same function `generate_input_stream` as in the example above, but
does not rely on any convention about line numbers.


## 6.2 Context qualifiers

There are four context qualifiers, `origin`, `visit`, `path` and `anchor`.
Each context qualifier MUST appear at most once.

### 6.2.1 Origin qualifier

This qualifier allows declaration of the *software origin* where the
object has been found or observed, as an URI.

For example, [`swh:1:cnt:4d99d2d18326621ccdd70f5ea66c2e2ac236ad8b;origin=https://gitorious.org/ocamlp3l/ocamlp3l_cvs.git`](https://archive.softwareheritage.org/swh:1:cnt:4d99d2d18326621ccdd70f5ea66c2e2ac236ad8b;origin=https://gitorious.org/ocamlp3l/ocamlp3l_cvs.git)
indicates that the content seen previously with the function `generate_input_stream` has
been seen in the Git repository at `https://gitorious.org/ocamlp3l/ocamlp3l_cvs.git`

This qualifier may be helpful to get hold of the full repository where a
content has been found, but there is no guarantee of success, as an origin
can change or disappear over time (as is the case in the example above, since 
gitorious.org was shut down in 2015).

### 6.2.2 Visit qualifier

This qualifier allows addition of the core SWHID identifier of the *snapshot* 
of the repository where the object has been found or observed.

For example, [`swh:1:cnt:4d99d2d18326621ccdd70f5ea66c2e2ac236ad8b;origin=https://gitorious.org/ocamlp3l/ocamlp3l_cvs.git;visit=swh:1:snp:d7f1b9eb7ccb596c2622c4780febaa02549830f9`](https://archive.softwareheritage.org/swh:1:cnt:4d99d2d18326621ccdd70f5ea66c2e2ac236ad8b;origin=https://gitorious.org/ocamlp3l/ocamlp3l_cvs.git;visit=swh:1:snp:d7f1b9eb7ccb596c2622c4780febaa02549830f9)
indicates that the content seen previously with the function `generate_input_stream` has
been seen in the Git repository at `https://gitorious.org/ocamlp3l/ocamlp3l_cvs.git`, when
its full state had the SWHID core identifier `swh:1:snp:d7f1b9eb7ccb596c2622c4780febaa02549830f9`. 

This qualifier is only valid when the `origin` qualifier is also present.
Otherwise, it MUST be ignored.

### 6.2.3 Path qualifier

This qualifier allows declaration of the *absolute file path*, from the *root
directory* associated to the *anchor node*, to the object designated by the core
SWHID identifier; when the anchor denotes a directory, a revision or a release,
the root directory is uniquely determined; when the anchor denotes a snapshot,
the root directory is the first directory reachable from the `HEAD` branch,
and undefined if such a reference is missing.

For example, [`swh:1:cnt:4d99d2d18326621ccdd70f5ea66c2e2ac236ad8b;origin=https://gitorious.org/ocamlp3l/ocamlp3l_cvs.git;visit=swh:1:snp:d7f1b9eb7ccb596c2622c4780febaa02549830f9;anchor=swh:1:rev:2db189928c94d62a3b4757b3eec68f0a4d4113f0;path=/Examples/SimpleFarm/simplefarm.ml`](https://archive.softwareheritage.org/swh:1:cnt:4d99d2d18326621ccdd70f5ea66c2e2ac236ad8b;origin=https://gitorious.org/ocamlp3l/ocamlp3l_cvs.git;visit=swh:1:snp:d7f1b9eb7ccb596c2622c4780febaa02549830f9;anchor=swh:1:rev:2db189928c94d62a3b4757b3eec68f0a4d4113f0;path=/Examples/SimpleFarm/simplefarm.ml)
indicates that the content seen previously with the function `generate_input_stream` has
been seen in the Git repository at `https://gitorious.org/ocamlp3l/ocamlp3l_cvs.git`, when
its full state had the SWHID core identifier `swh:1:snp:d7f1b9eb7ccb596c2622c4780febaa02549830f9`, and that it is named `simplefarm.ml` in the directory `Simplefarm` contained in the directory `Examples` contained in the root directory associated to the revision with core SWHID `swh:1:rev:2db189928c94d62a3b4757b3eec68f0a4d4113f0`.

This qualifier is only valid when the object type is not content.
Otherwise, it MUST be ignored.

### 6.2.4 Anchor qualifier

This qualifier is used in conjunction with the `path` qualifier.
It allows identification of a node in the Merkle DAG relative to which
a *path to the object* is specified, as the core identifier of a directory,
a revision, a release or a snapshot. See the example provided for the
`path` qualifier.

This qualifier is only valid when the `path` qualifier is also present.
Otherwise, it MUST be ignored.

### 6.3 Comparing qualified SWHIDs

One can determine whether two software artifacts are identical (bit by bit) by
comparing their core SWHIDs, ignoring all qualifiers. If the core SWHIDs are equal,
the software artifacts they represent are identical.

To determine if two SWHIDs represent the same software artifact (or fragment
thereof) in the same context, one must also compare their qualifiers. Two SWHIDs
are considered equivalent in context if:

- They both have the same set of qualifiers.
- The values of these qualifiers are identical. For instance, if both SWHIDs
  have an `anchor` qualifier, the core SWHID values of these qualifiers are
  identical. Similarly, if both have a `lines` qualifier, their values are identical.

Note that the order of the qualifiers does not matter for comparison purposes.

### 6.4 Recommendations

We recommend equipping identifiers meant for sharing with as many
qualifiers as possible. While qualifiers may be listed in any order, it
is good practice to present them in the following canonical order:
`origin`, `visit`, `anchor`, `path`, `lines` or `bytes`. 

By adhering to this order, it becomes easier to visually inspect and compare
SWHIDs, especially when dealing with a large number of identifiers.

Here is an example: [`swh:1:cnt:4d99d2d18326621ccdd70f5ea66c2e2ac236ad8b;origin=https://gitorious.org/ocamlp3l/ocamlp3l_cvs.git;visit=swh:1:snp:d7f1b9eb7ccb596c2622c4780febaa02549830f9;anchor=swh:1:rev:2db189928c94d62a3b4757b3eec68f0a4d4113f0;path=/Examples/SimpleFarm/simplefarm.ml;lines=9-15`](https://archive.softwareheritage.org/swh:1:cnt:4d99d2d18326621ccdd70f5ea66c2e2ac236ad8b;origin=https://gitorious.org/ocamlp3l/ocamlp3l_cvs.git;visit=swh:1:snp:d7f1b9eb7ccb596c2622c4780febaa02549830f9;anchor=swh:1:rev:2db189928c94d62a3b4757b3eec68f0a4d4113f0;path=/Examples/SimpleFarm/simplefarm.ml;lines=9-15)

Redundant information should be omitted: for example, if the *visit* is present,
and the *path* is relative to the snapshot indicated there, then the *anchor*
qualifier is superfluous; similarly, if the *path* is empty, it may be omitted.
